The sound of running feet jolted Maribel Alarcon Gomez awake before dawn.

She and her roommate, housed on the lower level of Charlie 200 inside the Eloy Detention Center, heard chaos echoing through the concrete halls as guards began unlocking cell doors.

It was about 4 a.m. May 5 — normally, the time women started emerging from their cells for breakfast. But this morning, something was wrong.

"My roommate came down from her bed and told me everyone is leaving, let's go," Alarcon Gomez recalled in an interview with The Arizona Republic. The women exited their cell, confused and suddenly in the middle of a bustling scene.

"There was a lot of screaming. People were coming and going," Alarcon Gomez, a 32-year-old Mexican citizen, said in Spanish. "There were a couple of guards, one with an extinguisher, running, too."

"But they weren't headed to the area where the incident was happening, where the microwaves were."

One of the two microwaves downstairs had an “electrical issue,” causing an evacuation, Fernando Burgos Ortiz, an Immigration and Customs Enforcement spokesperson, told The Republic.

“The smell was a horrible rubber smell,” Alarcon Gomez recalled in a July phone interview with The Republic. “It was unbearable.”  

“The guards, instead of taking us out through the emergency exit, took us through where the fire was,” she said, referring to the exits in each respective cell pod. “They made us inhale the smoke. The place was white, you couldn’t see a thing."

12 Photos

VIEW GALLERY

Migrant prayer vigil held outside Eloy Detention FacilityAttendees of a June 24, 2025, prayer vigil affiliated with the Catholic church read testimonies from migrants once held at the Eloy Detention Center.

Asked about fire safety training for both guards and detainees, an ICE spokesperson did not respond.

Brian Todd, public affairs manager at CoreCivic, the Brentwood, Tennessee-based for-profit prison company runs the Eloy Detention Center, told The Republic in a written statement that staff there responded at 4:04 a.m. May 5 to a microwave oven fire in a unit.

"As a precautionary measure, at 4:06 a.m. all individuals in the impacted area were quickly and safely relocated to the outdoor recreation area to mitigate any potential risks," Todd said. "Upon confirmation that the issue with the microwave had been abated and there were no additional electrical issues, everyone returned to their living areas.

"The facility has nine fire drills per month, and the most recent drill that occurred before the May 5 incident was May 1. Each cell POD at (the Eloy center) has Emergency Exit doors."

Alarcon Gomez said she used her hands to feel her way out of the building before making it out to the yard. 

Outside, everyone was coughing. Some lay on the ground, trying to fill their lungs with fresh air. Alarcon Gomez described a few women as seeming to be on the verge of unconsciousness, their bodies giving up. 

“We called the guards for help, but they wouldn't come. They wouldn’t even let us help them,” Alarcon Gomez said. 

Center staff became aware of a medical issue during the incident that Todd said was unrelated to the microwave fire, noting that ICE's Health Service Corps "is responsible for contracting, staffing and oversight of any medical and mental health services" at the facility and that further inquiries should be directed to them.

"Facility staff called a medical emergency and began life-saving measures until ICE’s Health Service Corps (IHSC) staff arrived and took over providing medical care," Todd said in CoreCivic's written response.

Historic rise in ICE detentions fuels safety, oversight worries
What happened inside the Eloy Detention Center on May 5 is the latest in what immigrant advocates, attorneys and current and former detainees describe as a pattern of mismanagement that endangers the lives of the detainees in their care at the privately run Eloy Detention Center.  

Operated by CoreCivic under a recently extended contract with ICE, Eloy has historically faced scrutiny, with one of the highest numbers of in-custody deaths at a single ICE detention center, 16 since 2005, according to a figure from 2019.

Now, with a surge in detentions under President Donald Trump’s hard-line immigration agenda — and with weakened oversight after cuts to watchdog offices within the Department of Homeland Security — advocates say conditions are growing increasingly dangerous. The situation is renewing concerns over detainee safety, legal access and the federal government’s expanding reliance on an already strained immigration detention system.  

As of July 17, ICE was detaining just shy of 57,000 people nationwide, according to agency data reviewed by The Arizona Republic, among the highest population levels in recent years.

However, researchers at Syracuse University’s Transactional Records Access Clearinghouse found that when adding the reported average daily population figures from each individual facility, the number only totaled 42,221, as they said in a July 18 online publication.

Congress allocated nearly $3.5 billion to fund ICE’s capacity to hold immigrants in custody, resulting in 41,500 beds in detention centers. 

Regardless of which number is correct, the figures show the system is operating over ICE's funded capacity.   


All series are visible.

Capacity

Total detainees

The passage of the budget reconciliation bill, otherwise known as the “One Big Beautiful Bill,” in early July increases spending for immigration detention to $45 billion.  

“ICE will now have 13 times its current fiscal budget for detention, which is already operating at a historic high, on top of the funding in ICE’s annual budget that Congress sets each year,” said Silky Shah, executive director of Detention Watch Network, a national advocacy coalition pushing to end the use of immigration detention in the United States, in a news statement after the Senate passage of the budget reconciliation bill. 

Eloy Detention Center and La Palma Correctional Center and Saguaro Correctional Center in Eloy, Arizona. Getty Images

Inside Eloy: Three to a cell, nowhere to turn, detainees say
As of June 23, Arizona’s six immigration detention centers housed an average of 4,089 individuals daily, according to data from the Transactional Records Access Clearinghouse, a nonprofit, nonpartisan organization that collects, researches and distributes data from federal agencies like ICE. 

Eloy Detention Center, about 65 miles south of Phoenix, holds roughly one-third of Arizona’s detained immigrant population, averaging 1,380 people detained at the facility per day — the second-highest in the state behind the La Paz County Adult Detention Facility near the California border. 

The exact number of people held at Eloy is unclear, as the population fluctuates daily. During an unannounced oversight visit on May 29, U.S. Rep. Yassamin Ansari, D-Arizona, reported that approximately 1,520 of the 1,550 beds at the facility were occupied.

Most of the people held at Eloy do not have criminal records, according to ICE’s facilities data, as is the case with several of Elle Delgado's clients.


All series are visible.

= 3

Criminal

Noncriminal


In one case, a couple from Russia was detained at a port of entry in California. Only the husband was paroled; he now resides in Massachusetts, while his wife remains detained. 

Delgado, a paralegal who manages cases for the Texas-based Eugene Delgado Law Firm, said the Russian woman spent six days there before being transferred to the Otay Mesa Detention Center outside of San Diego on July 21, where she spent two months before being transferred to the Eloy Detention Center. 

“She has been detained from the moment that she entered the United States,” Delgado said.

Several of Delgado’s clients have reported an increase in the number of people detained. She said the detention center now deals with overcrowding issues. 

Maksim Borisov, a gay detainee housed in the male quarters of the Eloy Detention Center since February, told The Republic that some pods began to put three people to a room. 

Borisov fled Russia in 2023 over fears of violence in retaliation for donating to the Ukrainian war effort, anti-Putin protests, and a LGBTQ lifestyle. He and two family members, also fleeing, sought asylum at the U.S.-Mexico border in 2024 when detained.

“Our cells are ... small enough for two people,” Borisov, the 22-year-old, said. “Everyone is complaining and breaking the (beds).”  

When people, including Muslim detainees who said they no longer had space to pray, raised concerns and questioned officers about the decision to place three people in a cell, Borisov said detention staff simply told them they would “have to get along with each other.” 

“It's absolutely full and we cannot even turn around,” he said.  

Borisov said the extra beds were removed from the cells and stored for the duration of Ansari’s visit. The beds were put back in the cells after her departure, he said.

Ansari and Laura St. John, the legal director for the Florence Immigrant and Refugee Rights Project, which provides services at the Eloy Detention Center, discussed some of the complaints they have heard from people inside the facility on a media call.

“We're hearing from detained folks that there are more people in detention right now than there have been,” St. John said during the call.  Many of the Florence Project’s clients have claimed that three people are being put in a room in some pods, she said, describing the move as “highly unusual.”

CoreCivic did not directly address the question of three-beds-per-pod but said the company takes seriously its "obligation to adhere to all applicable federal detention standards in all our ICE contracted facilities," including Eloy.

"All of our immigration facilities operate with a significant amount of oversight and accountability, including being monitored by ICE officials on a daily basis, to ensure an appropriate standard of living and care for every detainee," Todd said.

The Eloy Detention Center, "as with all our immigration facilities, is audited regularly and without notice several times a year, and routinely visited by elected officials, attorneys, families and volunteers," he said.

People detained at the Eloy facility get "three nutritious meals a day," Todd said, and staff members "take great care to offer meals that support specialized diets, including religious diets and more than a dozen therapeutic diets, as well as cultural preferences.

"Menus are reviewed and approved on a regular basis by a registered dietitian to ensure appropriate nutrition is provided," he said. "This menu review includes the common fare diet and religious diets, including food portions and nutritional content."

Various community members spoke at a press event organized by Trans Queer Pueblo, Semillas AZ and Poder in Action on July 3, 2025, calling for the release of Arbella Rodríguez Márquez, held in detention at the Eloy Detention Center. Raphael Romero Ruiz/The Republic

Health-care gaps endanger detainees, advocates warn
Overcrowding is just one of many issues of concern for attorneys and advocates monitoring conditions inside civil immigration detention centers.

Inadequate medical care has remained a persistent worry across Arizona’s detention system, repeatedly flagged by human rights organizations, elected officials and legal professionals. 

In 2024, the Florence Project released two reports detailing the formal complaints it filed with federal oversight agencies on behalf of detained clients. 

Of the 75 complaints filed across three Arizona facilities, nearly half originated from the Eloy Detention Center. 

Medical care was among the top concerns, with complaints ranging from delayed access to medical records to missed doses of prescription medications. 

Borisov described several instances where he has experienced issues obtaining medications needed for his mental-health conditions.

Among the most consequential, Borisov said he was not given the prescribed pills he had previously taken for the past nine years to help with an anxiety disorder. Borisov noted that this greatly affected his ability to explain why he sought refuge in the U.S. during his Convention Against Torture interview, afforded to individuals who express they are at risk of torture by their governments.

CAT, for short, is harder to qualify for than asylum and lacks benefits such as a path to citizenship, but it would allow Borisov to avoid deportation to Russia.

Borisov said he had a panic attack during his interview. He was denied protection under CAT. He has since made detention officials aware of his issue receiving his medication, requesting another interview. That request has been denied repeatedly.

Such lapses can prove especially dangerous for individuals with serious or life-threatening conditions. 

Todd emphasized what he called CoreCivic's "limited but important role in America’s immigration system.

"It's important to understand that CoreCivic has a long-standing, zero-tolerance policy not to advocate for or against any legislation that serves as the basis for — or determines the duration of — an individual’s detention," he said in his written statement.

"CoreCivic does not enforce immigration laws, arrest anyone who may be in violation of immigration laws, or have any say whatsoever in an individual’s deportation or release. CoreCivic also does not know the circumstances of individuals when they are placed in our facilities. Our responsibility is to care for each person respectfully and humanely while they receive the legal due process that they are entitled to."

A group of approximately 40 people of different Catholic organizations gathered outside of the Eloy Detention Center as tempatures reached the high 90s midday on June 24, 2025. Raphael Romero Ruiz/The Republic

Months without HIV care preceded detainee’s death
A national report released in June 2024 by a coalition of human rights groups found that most of the 17 detainees with human immunodeficiency virus interviewed at ICE facilities nationwide reported significant problems accessing adequate HIV care, including delays, denials and inconsistent medication availability. 

ICE’s Performance-Based National Detention Standards mandate that individuals diagnosed with HIV receive care in line with national guidelines from the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, the CDC and the Infectious Diseases Society of America. 

The standards also state that detainees may request HIV testing at any time and must be clinically evaluated if presenting symptoms “suggestive of HIV.” 

Serawit Gezahegn Dejene, a 45-year-old asylum-seeker from Ethiopia, died in ICE custody in January from complications related to untreated HIV.

According to ICE’s Detainee Death Report, Dejene’s critical health issues went unidentified for months, despite his deteriorating condition and multiple evaluations by medical staff. 

No mention of HIV appeared in ICE’s medical summaries before his emergency hospitalization. 

Dejene was taken into custody by U.S. Border Patrol near Lukeville on Aug. 19, 2024, and transferred two days later to the Eloy Detention Center. During his medical intake, a licensed practical nurse documented that Dejene denied any prior health conditions and cleared him for general population housing. 

But in the weeks that followed, Dejene repeatedly sought medical attention, beginning with back pain. 

Dejene visited the facility’s medical unit four times between Nov. 3 and Dec. 16. Each time, he was given a single dose of pain medication in line with treatment protocols for musculoskeletal pain. 

By Dec. 20, Dejene reported new symptoms, and a nurse practitioner referred him to Banner Casa Grande Medical Center, where he was diagnosed with “probable lymphoma,” a type of cancer that affects the body’s ability to fight off infections.

Lymphoma is an “AIDS-Associated Cancer,” according to the Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center. People with HIV are up to 50 times more likely to develop the most common type of this cancer, non-Hodgkin lymphoma, according to an explainer posted online by the center. 

On New Year’s Eve, he was airlifted to Banner University Medical Center, Phoenix, and admitted to the ICU. There, doctors quickly identified his immunocompromised status and diagnosed a cascade of conditions, in addition to the earlier findings.

His condition continued to deteriorate, and he was placed on a ventilator in early January. 

On Jan. 29, 2025, after a conference call between ICE’s Health Service Corps, Enforcement and Removal Operations and Dejene’s family, life-support measures were withdrawn. 

The Maricopa County Medical Examiner's Office determined the cause of death to be “complications of multiple infections in the setting of human immunodeficiency virus.” His death was ruled natural. 

The prolonged delay in diagnosis and treatment drew criticism from medical experts and advocates.  

“None of the medical screenings that they did found that he was HIV-positive," St. John said during the media call after Ansari’s visit. "He went for months in custody without being treated for this disease.”

ICE said in a statement to The Republic in response to questions surrounding Dejene’s death that "any death in custody is one too many."

Burgos Ortiz, the ICE spokesperson, said it "prioritizes the health, safety, and well-being of all noncitizens in its care and remains committed to ensuring that all those in its custody reside in safe, secure, and humane environments" and that it was "a longstanding practice to provide comprehensive medical care from the moment a noncitizen enters ICE custody."

Other federal officials have suggested some deaths are inevitable.

Maribel Cachu, a farmer who drove down from Phoenix to attend the prayer vigil, holds up a crucifix necklace and an umbrella with the words "Si Se Puede" written on it in support of those held inside the civil detention center on June 24, 2025. Raphael Romero Ruiz/The Republic

"People die in ICE custody. People die in jails and state prisons," Trump's Border Czar Tom Homan said in responding to a White House reporter’s question about the death of a 75-year-old Cuban man who was detained at a Florida facility.

"The question should be, how many lives does ICE save? Because when they go into detention, we find many with diseases and stuff we deal with right away to prevent that."

ICE detainees lose critical legal access, attorneys say
Beyond concerns over living conditions and medical care, attorneys say systemic delays and funding cuts are making it increasingly difficult for people in ICE custody to access legal representation. 

In April, the Trump administration moved to end the Legal Orientation Program, a program described as “bare minimum necessary to protect due process rights" by the Florence Project's legal director.  

“Without the (program), hundreds of thousands of migrants will face the full force of the U.S. legal system without any sort of legal education or support, leading to disastrous and potentially deadly outcomes,” St. John said in a written statement in April.  

The Florence Project, along with eight other immigrant-rights organizations, filed a renewed temporary restraining order on the sunset of the program.  

The Trump administration’s move has created obstacles for the nonprofit to continue its “Know Your Rights” presentations, which are held inside Eloy and other detention centers. Organizers of the presentations no longer have the same access to information on who will appear before an immigration judge for the first time.  

“We relied on those lists that were provided by the facility through this federal program, to make sure that when we created a list of who we were going to talk to,” St. John said.  

Their clients are telling The Florence Project about an increase in the number of people at the Eloy Detention Center, but she said she couldn't confirm that without access to a population list. At the same time, she said, the nonprofit is providing legal education to far fewer people. 

Trump administration move leaves detention oversight gap
The poor conditions described at Eloy are occurring as the federal government simultaneously expands detention operations and dismantles internal oversight mechanisms designed to monitor abuse. 

On March 21, hundreds of employees at the Department of Homeland Security’s three key watchdog offices — the Office for Civil Rights and Civil Liberties, the Office of the Immigration Detention Ombudsman and the Citizenship and Immigration Services Ombudsman — were suspended via mass email, effectively shutting down the offices, according to court documents filed in April. 

A lawsuit brought by advocacy groups including Robert F. Kennedy Human Rights and the Southern Border Communities Coalition, argues that the Trump administration’s move to eliminate oversight offices mandated by Congress is unlawful. 

The administration maintains that the offices have not been eliminated. 

Michelle Brané, who served as the head of the Office of the Immigration Detention Ombudsman from April 2024 until the change in administration in 2025, said the office was created to fill a critical accountability gap inside Department of Homeland Security detention operations and that the gap now is left gaping again. 

“The problem for decades was that oversight of detention facilities just didn't seem effective,” Brané told The Republic in June about how the watchdog office came to be.  

“The idea came from the concept of saying, maybe if there's somebody working from the inside, trying to resolve problems, that might help get at the matter.” 

Before leading the detention oversight office, Brané worked on former President Joe Biden’s Family Reunification Task Force as the executive director.

The Office of the Immigration Detention Ombudsman was established by Congress in 2019 with a mandate to promote safe, humane conditions in immigration detention by independently examining ICE and CBP facilities. 

The ombudsman’s office was tasked with investigating complaints from detained individuals and issuing recommendations to improve agency operations.  

Brané coordinated a team of more than 100 employees and experts from various fields, who conducted site visits to assess conditions across the 200 ICE detention facilities.

Much of their work consisted of “thousands of little corrections” made daily. 

“That was great, and I didn’t want that to stop,” Brané said. “But there's a lot more an ombudsman could be doing in terms of fixing some of those systemic issues.” 

The most common complaints Brané’s office received were related to medical care, from detainees claiming they received the wrong medication or having trouble getting an appointment, she said. 

“We were in the process of digging deeper into the medical issues,” Brané said. “One big finding we made (was) that so many of the issues were around staffing.”

According to CoreCivic's spokesperson, staffing patterns "are reviewed and approved by our government partners at ICE." Todd also suggested that "both public and private correctional agencies across the country — and indeed many industries more broadly — have faced staffing challenges in recent years."

CoreCivic "has been laser focused on addressing staffing in several ways," Todd said, through "encouraging public service-oriented individuals to give the challenging but fulfilling field of corrections a try," and also by providing their team members with the support and tools necessary to make working at CoreCivic a career.

"We’re proud of our dedicated team at EDC (the Eloy center) who work hard every day to keep those in our care safe while providing for their needs as they progress through the civil immigration process," he said.

Suspension of watchdogs leaves detainees vulnerable
The most recent compliance inspection by ICE’s Office of Professional Responsibility found a similar complaint about medical care, while representatives from its Office of Detention Oversight, an office separate from the Office of the Immigration Detention Ombudsman, interviewed 46 detainees. 

After the inspection, the Office of Detention Oversight downgraded Eloy Detention Center’s previously awarded "superior" facility rating to “acceptable/adequate” because of an increase in deficiencies related to the handling of detainees’ personal property. 

With mass layoffs to DHS watchdog offices now in effect, Brané warned that a system already under strain has become far less transparent. 

Among Ansari's requests, she asked Noem and Lyons to provide detailed data on complaints filed with the Office of the Immigration Detention Ombudsman and the Office for Civil Rights and Civil Liberties over the past year, including the number of complaints that were “adequately investigated” and the response times of agencies.

The death of the 75-year-old Cuban national detained at a Florida facility at the end of June brings the total number of people who have died in ICE custody to 13 so far in fiscal year 2025, surpassing the total number of deaths from the previous year in just half the time.

As the number of people in detention continues to climb, Brané fears the rollback of independent oversight will lead to unchecked abuse. 

For its part, CoreCivic pointed to what it called its "robust grievance process" for people in detention.

"We have a robust grievance process available to all detainees that provides multiple safe and discrete avenues for concerns to be raised, including toll-free telephone numbers," Todd of CoreCivic said. "All detainees also have access to management staff. Most detainee complaints are processed through ICE's (Office of Enforcement and Removal Operations) Detention, Removals and Information Line."

Cars pass outside the Eloy Detention Center in protest on April 10, 2020. Patrick Breen/The Republic

'We all thought she died': Detainees recount emergency
Alarcon Gomez described what she called unprofessional behavior from staff during the May 5 incident.

After making it out of the building, Alarcon Gomez and the rest of the women housed inside several Charlie pods were "screamed at" and “insulted,” she said, and instructed to move toward the basketball courts, where they were told to lie on the ground.

Feeling overwhelmed by everything that had happened, some of the women began to cry, she said.

One woman Alarcon Gomez had befriended during her time in the detention center began to lose consciousness. Alarcon Gomez’s roommate held on to her as she lost her footing and collapsed. 

“We all thought she died,” Alarcon Gomez said. A guard approached the roommate and instructed her to leave. 

The woman was left on the ground. 

Alarcon Gomez said an ambulance took 15 minutes to arrive.

The paramedics delivered CPR. They used a bag-valve-mask on her to try to provide ventilation. When that didn’t work, the paramedics attached an automated external defibrillator to her to deliver electric shocks to restore her heartbeat. 

“They were able to finally reanimate her,” Alarcon Gomez said.

When The Republic asked if a woman was revived during the emergency, ICE's Burgos Ortiz said that a detainee collapsed during evacuation but emphasized it was “unrelated to the incident.”

“The detainee was transported to the Banner Casa Grande Medical Center for further evaluation,” Burgos Ortiz said.

ICE's timeline of the May 5 incident, including evacuation and time spent outside, indicates that detention officials handled the emergency in 30 minutes.

Trauma lingers for detainees housed at Eloy
Alarcon Gomez was released from the Eloy Detention Center and deported through a port of entry in Nogales on May 22, but still remembers what happened that day vividly.

"Of course, we were scared," she recalled. "We, unfortunately, were witnesses to something very lamentable."

Like many other Mexican citizens expelled from the country through Arizona, she visited the Kino Border Initiative. 

There, Tracey Horan, the nonprofit’s associate director of education and advocacy, helped Alarcon Gomez fill out a complaint addressed to the Office for Civil Rights and Civil Liberties as well as the Office of the Immigration Detention Ombudsman. 

In the June 5 complaint, she lists a number of allegations of mistreatment while she was in Customs and Border Protection and ICE’s custody, including the May 5 incident. 

Horan said that, after the submission of the complaint, she has not received any correspondence from the watchdog office.

She explained that, typically, she would receive an automatic response confirming the receipt of her complaint. She got one in response to an April complaint that informed her that the Office of the Immigration Detention Ombudsman had been abolished and the inbox would no longer be monitored.

Since April, Horan has submitted three complaints to the Office for Civil Rights and Civil Liberties and copied the Office of the Immigration Detention Ombudsman and has not heard back from either office. 

Have any news tips or story ideas about the U.S.-Mexico border in Arizona? Reach the reporter at rromeroruiz@gannett.com. Follow him on X, formerly Twitter, @raphaeldelag.
